---
title: "Data Engineering on AWS: Tools and Concepts"
layout: post
date: 2025-03-13
categories: [aws]
tags: [data, data engineering, notes]
---
## Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery Tools

Continuous integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) facilitate agility and efficiency in data engineering. CI/CD streamlines the processes of building, testing, and deploying software in a data engineering pipeline.

## Infrastructure as Code Tools

Infrastructure was traditionally provisioned using a combination of scripts and manual processes. This often resulted in the creation of new environments that were not repeatable, reliable, or consistent.

IaC refers to managing and provisioning infrastructure through machine-readable definition files instead of physical hardware configuration or interactive configuration tools.

There are multiple proven and reliable IaC tools, including AWS CloudFormation, AWS Cloud Development Kit (AWS CDK), and HashiCorp TerraForm, that can be used to deploy workflows employing AWS services.

The flagship IaC product in AWS is AWS CloudFormation.

### CloudFormation

Using AWS CloudFormation is very straightforward. You construct a template that defines what you want to build, and then upload the template. AWS deploys the system defined by the template.

CloudFormation also can detect and remediate configuration drift. This ensures that the actual state of the infrastructure is aligned to the desired state defined by the template.

### AWS CDK

AWS Cloud Development Kit (AWS CDK) is an open source software development framework that you can use to define and deploy AWS resources using programming languages like TypeScript, Python, Java, and C#. Instead of using declarative templates, you write imperative code to define your infrastructure.

AWS CDK internally uses CloudFormation to provision and manage AWS resources. When you synthesize your AWS CDK code, it generates its own CloudFormation templates and then deploys those templates using CloudFormation.

## AWS Serverless Application Model

AWS Serverless Application Model (AWS SAM) is a framework for building serverless applications on AWS.

AWS SAM consists of two primary parts:

- AWS SAM template specification
  - An open source framework that you can use to define your serverless application infrastructure on AWS. An AWS SAM template file closely follows the format of a CloudFormation template file, but it uses a simplified and concise syntax. You design the architecture using this simplified syntax, and AWS SAM transforms it into a full CloudFormation template.
- AWS SAM command line interface (AWS SAM CLI)
  - A command line tool that you can use with AWS SAM templates and supported third-party integrations to build and run your serverless applications.

## Networking Considerations

### AWS Site-to-Site VPN

The AWS Site-to-Site VPN feature establishes an encrypted VPN connection between your virtual private cloud (VPC) in AWS and your on-premises network. It is mandatory in on-premises or cloud hybrid environments. AWS Site-to-Site VPN is used when you need to access resources in your VPC from your on-premises network or the other way around.

The key components of a site-to-site VPN include the following:

- VPN gateway or transit gateway on the AWS side
- Customer gateway resource in AWS that represents the customer gateway device
- Customer gateway device on the on-premises side
- Data transferred between the VPC and on-premises network is routed over the encrypted VPN connection to maintain the confidentiality and integrity of the data in transit

### AWS Direct Connect

Data intensive workloads require a reliable and secure network connection. AWS Direct Connect establishes a private network connection between on-premises infrastructure and AWS, bypassing the public internet. This provides more consistent network performance allowing you to access AWS services.

### VPC endpoints

Amazon VPC provides two types of endpoints: gateway endpoints and interface endpoints. With these endpoints, you can securely connect VPC resources to other AWS services without traversing the internet.

- Gateway endpoints

  - These endpoints are used to connect the VPC to specific AWS services like Amazon S3 and DynamoDB.
  - They work by adding a prefix list to the VPC route table, which routes the traffic to the AWS service through the AWS private network.
- Interfact endpoints

  - These endpoints enable private connectivity to AWS services, your own services, and AWS Marketplace partner services using PrivateLink.
  - They are implemented as elastic network interfaces with private IP addresses that serve as an entry point for traffic to the target service.

### AWS PrivateLink

PrivateLink is a feature that provides private connectivity between VPCs, AWS services, other AWS accounts, and supported AWS Marketplace partner services. You can use PrivateLink to access these services by using private IP addresses without exposing your traffic to the public internet.

With minimal configuration, AWS services appear to reside right inside your VPC, making them accessible. PrivateLink routes the traffic between VPCs and services over the AWS network so you no longer need an internet gateway, a NAT device, or a public IP address for your VPC.

## Cost Optimization Tools

AWS offers a combination of strategies and options that can greatly optimize costs while maintaining the required performance and reliability levels.

- Cost Optimization in Architecture:
  - Serverless computing
  - Auto scaling
  - Data lifecycle management
  - Query optimization
  - Resource monitoring and rightsizing

AWS Services for Cost Optimization:

- AWS Cost Explorer: This service provides visibility into your AWS costs and usage patterns. You can use it to analyze and identify areas for cost savings. It offers features like cost allocation reports, cost forecasting, and anomaly detection.

- AWS Budgets: With AWS Budgets, you can set custom budgets and receive alerts when your costs or usage exceed (or are forecasted to exceed) the budgeted amount. This helps you proactively manage costs and avoid unexpected expenses.
- AWS data tranfer pricing tier: AWS offers a data transfer pricing tier that can significantly reduce costs for large-scale data transfers within the same AWS Region or between different Regions.
- Amazon S3 Intelligent-Tiering: This storage class for Amazon S3 automatically moves objects to the most cost-effective access tier based on changing access patterns. This helps optimize storage costs.
- AWS Auto Scaling: By using AWS Auto Scaling for your data analytics resources (such as EC2 instances and EMR clusters), you can automatically scale resources up or down based on demand. This ensures that you only pay for the resources you need.
- AWS Cost Anomaly Detection: This machine learning-powered feature can automatically detect anomalies in your AWS cost and usage data, helping you identify and address potential cost spikes or inefficiencies.
