---
layout: post
title:  "Intro to AWS Database Solutions"
date:   2025-03-10
categories: [aws]
tags: [cloud, databases, notes]
---
Moving on with the **AWS SAA KBRP** (that's how i shorten the name of the AWS Solutions Architect Associate Knowledge Base Readiness Path, i guess you can see how that's useful).

Today I'm tackling databases.

DBs are the core of most applications as they guarantee the persistance of data in the application.

AWS offers many different DB solutions:

- **RDS**
  - it's a RDBMS service compatible with the most common SQL engines: MySQL, MariaDB, Postgres, Oracle, SQL Server and with AWS' custom SQL DB, Aurora.
  - with a service like RDS the user only needs to worry about the application as the management of the DB is done entirely by AWS: provisioning, duplication across multiple AZs for redundancy, etc.
  - RDS is a server-based service, meaning it charges by the hour.
  - The components of the service are decoupled meaning you can upgrade one (for example storage or compute) without affecting the others.

- **DynamoDB**:
  - NoSQL database used to store key-value pairs.
  - Serverless, charging per table usage
  - Based on standalone tables. Data is organized in items and each item has attributes.
  - DynamoDB handles replication and high availability and redundancy.
  - It's a very fast solution.
  - Being NoSQL, it does not require a schema. So it doesn't have the limits of SQL DBs.
    - you can add or remove attributes at any time. Each item can have the same or different attributes.
  - Queries: usually do not span multiple tables but elements in the same table.
  - Data is fully encrypted at rest.

- **DocumentDB**
  - NoSQL database more suited to document storage compared to DynamoDB, and it's MongoDB compatible

- **Neptune**:
  - graph database

- **QLDB**:
  - ledger database that guarantees immutability, very good for industries that need this feature for compliance.

- **Elasticache**:
  - in-memory caching solution. Supports two caching engines: Redis and Memcached

- **MemoryDB for Redis**

- **Keyspaces**(for Apache Cassandra)

- **Timestream**
