---
layout: post
title:  "Deep Dive on AWS Database offerings"
date:   2025-03-12
categories: [aws]
tags: [cloud, databases, notes]
---

> To be reviewed and re-organized with other related notes.

### The Nature of Data

There are mainly 3 types of data:

- **Structured**
    - in related tables in a database engine
- **Unstructured**
    - in files
- **Semistructured**
    - JSON files in a database engine

This is a crucial distinction as different data types need different databases to be handled correctly. 

Therefore, different types of databases exist to handle these data types correctly:

- Relational Databases: A relational database is built to store structured data in tables using a defined schema.
- Key-Value Databases: Key-value databases are a type of non-relational database that store unstructured data in the form of key-value pairs. Key-value databases logically store data in a single table. Within the table, the values are associated with a specific key and stored in the form of blob objects without a predefined schema. The values can be of nearly any type.
- Document Stores: Document stores are a type of non-relational database that store semistructured and unstructured data in the form of files. Document stores keep files containing data as a series of elements. These files can be navigated using numerous languages including Python and Node.js. Each element is an instance of a person, place, thing, or event. For example, a document store may hold a series of log files from a set of servers. These log files can each contain the specifics for that system without concern for what the log files in other systems contain.
- Non-relational in-memory Databases: In-memory data stores can be used for both structured and semistructured data sources. In-memory databases are used for applications that require real-time access to data. Most databases have areas of data that are frequently accessed but seldom updated. Additionally, querying a database is always slower and more expensive than locating a key in a key-value pair cache. Some database queries are especially expensive to perform. By caching such query results, you pay the price of the query once and then are able to quickly retrieve the data multiple times without having to re-execute the query.
- Non-relational graph Databases: Graph databases are purpose-built to store any type of data: structured, semistructured, or unstructured. Graph databases store data as nodes, while edges store information on the relationships between nodes. Data within a graph database is queried using specific languages associated with the software tool you have implemented.

## Relational Databases

Relational databases rely on a series of structures, called tables, to hold data.

A column, known as a field, describes one attribute of the entity. A row, known as a record, represents a single instance of an entity.

Rules within the schema define if the attribute is required or optional.

To create a relationship between tables, you first need to ensure that every row in a table is unique. Do this by creating a public key (e.g., customer ID) in a table to give each record a unique value. A foreign key uses values from the primary key in another table to define a record in the current table. This is what builds a relationship between two tables. 

There are two main ways to manage DB transactions (insertion and removal of data):
- **OLTP**: Online Transaction Processing
- **OLAP**: Online Analytical Processing

These two ways optimize for different things: Read and Write operations use the same underlying resources below the db (compute, memory and storage) in very different ways, so it's difficult to optimize for both. This is not really an issue in small databases but becomes a problem with large datasets.

Thus OLTP optimizes for writing and OLAP optimizes for reading data. OLAP optimized databases are also called **data warehouses**.

**Data Indexing**

Tables should be indexed to allow a query to quickly find the data needed to produce a result. Indexes can also help control the way data is physically stored on disk. They physically group records into a predictable order based on the key values within the table. This plays a huge part in the speed and efficiency of queries.

### Core DB AWS Offerings

### Relational DBs

### Amazon RDS

RDS is a relational database services. Data in RDBs is accessed via SQL. 

RDS relieves users of all admin tasks related to databases: hardware provisioning, OS and DB setup, patching, backups, etc.

RDS is highly available: AWS automatically deploys failover standby copies of the DB in a different AZs to ensure durability and availability.

The user only pays for the used capacity and resources: there are many different instance types and all are compatible with most SQL database engines such as MySQL, MariaDB, or PostgreSQL.

RDBs are usually useful for storing transactional and analytical data.

There are mainly two types of instances:
- On-Demand: pay by the hour
- Reserved: pay a 1 or 3 year term for a discount

Storage is paid per GB/month and I/O is billed per million requests. 

DB Instance class: combination of storage, memory, compute
Database engine: the engine managing the data

RDS instances live inside VPCs and can be secured with 3 types of security groups: database, VPC and EC2.

RDS uses IAM to manage credentials. RDS requires authentication and permissions to access the data. 

RDS data is encrypted at rest with AES-256 encryption.

### Amazon Aurora

Aurora is a RDB built for the cloud compatible with MySQL and PostgreSQL.

Aurora stores data in tables, records and fields and has automatic high-availability built-in.

Aurora is fully managed by Amazon RDS and backs up data to S3. 

Aurora is built for high performance and 5 times faster than MySQL and 3 times faster than Postgres.

Aurora has automatic scaling and pay-as-you-go pricing.

There are 3 types of pricing: On-Demand, Reserved, Serverless. 

### Amazon Redshift

Missing

## Non-relational DBs

Non-relational databases can be deployed on massively distributed commodity servers. These databases have an advantage in scaling and can handle much larger data sets than relational databases. The massive distribution and scale does come at a cost, in the form of eventual consistency. This means that data may not be updated at the same time for all of the distributed systems.

### Dynamo DB

Missing

## Database Migration

There are several AWS tools and services to migrate data from an external database to AWS. AWS Database Migration Service (AWS DMS) helps you migrate databases to AWS efficiently and securely. The source database can remain fully operational during the migration, minimizing downtime to applications. At its most basic level, AWS DMS is an instance in the AWS Cloud that runs replication software.

AWS DMS supports homogeneous migrations such as Oracle to Oracle as well as heterogeneous migrations between different database engines, such as Oracle to MySQL.

However, AWS DMS creates only those objects required to efficiently migrate the data. To migrate the remaining database elements and schema, you need to use other tools depending on the type of database migration.

## Database Architectures Overview

### Server-Based

### Serverless