---
layout: post
title:  "OpenPSA: Open Source Professional Services Automation"
date:   2025-03-11
categories: [coding]
tags: [python, psa, projects, fastapi]
---

> I will probably update this post dynamically as work on the project goes on. 

For the last 8 months I have been involved on an internal project at my company to update our internally developed PSA solution. 

We have been performing market scoutings to find suitable alternatives before even contemplating to build our own solution, again. 

All this searching made me wonder: how hard could this be that the company is so scared to build it again? (We have an internal dev team that works for clients, so the knowledge is there)

So **OpenPSA** was born. Yes, I know, there's another software that does the same thing that has the same name, but I don't really care. I liked the name and nobody is going to give a shit about my software anyway. 

Anyways, OpenPSA is a tool to manage the day to day operations of a consulting company. 

At the moment it is just a FastAPI backend server that performs CRUD operations on a SQLite database with some business logic on top of it. 

Also, if you don't know FastAPI, you can learn more here: [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)

It currently supports the following entities:
- Consultants
- Roles (for Role-Based Access Control)
- Rates (both Cost and Billing)
- Teams
- Projects
- Allocations
- Invoices
- Line Items
- Time Entries

And supports CRUD operations on all of them, with a few business rules to make it all make sense, mainly related to the dependencies that exist between the various entities, meaning that, for example:

- you can't delete a project that has teams attached to them, or individual consultants, or Time Entries, or Invoices, etc
- you can't delete a team if it has consultants in it
- and so on. 

I'm currently iteratively testing the app to see where it "breaks" meaning where I find operations that are allowed but that shouldn't be allowed on a logical level. 

It's the only way I can think of to incrementally build the business logic, which is most of the application since apart from that it's just a matter of performing standard CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) on records in the database.

Anyway, it's a fun little project, still completely missing a frontend, and probably won't have one anytime soon, since I really do not enjoy coding frontend. 

You can check it out here: [OpenPSA](https://github.com/thetombrider/openpsa)

